# Safe Boot: Booting Linux Safely

Safe Boot has four goals:
* Booting only code that is authorized by the system owner (by installing a hardware protected platform key for the kernel and initrd)
* Streamlining the encrypted disk boot process (by storing keys in the TPM, and only unsealing them if the firmware and configuration is unmodified)
* Protecting the runtime system integrity (by optionally enabling a read-only root with dm-verity and signed root hash)
* Making it harder for an adversary to exfiltrate data (by enabling Linux kernel features to de-priviledge the root account)

The [slightly more secure Heads firmware](http://osresearch.net)
is a better choice for user freedom since it replaces the proprietary firmware
with open source, while Safe Boot's objective is to work with existing
commodity hardware and UEFI SecureBoot mechanisms, as well as relatively
stock Linux distributions.

This guide was written for a Thinkpad X1 Carbon Gen 6 running
Ubuntu 20.04 and `tpm2-tools` 4.1.1, plus some tools built from source.
Unfortunately there has been churn in the names of the tools and the
command line options, so it does not work on 18.04.

## Setup phase
This is done once when the system is being setup to use Safe Boot mode.
Note that the hardware token and key signing portions can be done offline
on a separate disconnected machine and then signed keys copied to the machine.

### UEFI firmware configuration
The goal of these configuration changes are to remove several of
the easy attacks such as booting from external disks, modifying kernel or initrd on disk,
changing kernel command line parameters, as well as some of the more esoteric ones
like DMA attacks against the Thunderbolt ports during the boot process.

* SecureBoot setup mode, erase keys
* Supervisor password (do not lose it! it is very difficult to bypass)
* Tamper switches
* Thunderbolt 3
* ???
* TPM clear 

### UEFI Secure Boot signing keys
UEFI Secure Boot settings that the system will only run bootloaders that
are signed by keys in the SPI flash.  By default these keys are the OEM and
Microsoft, and Microsoft will sign anyone else's key for $99, so it is
important to replace these keys with ones under control of the computer
owner. There is typically a signed "shim" that transfers control to the
unsigned grub bootloader and kernel, which is problematic for security.

A safer way to boot is to package the kernel, initrd and command line
into a single EFI executable that is signed by the computer owner's
key.  This also reduces the attack surface by removing `grub` and
the overly complicated config files, as well as speeds up the boot
process a little bit.

The owner key can be generated by openssl and stored offline, although
using a hardware token like a yubikey greatly enhances the security
of the system since even with root access an attacker can't
gain persistence in the `/` or in the kernel.  

Skip this if you have already initialized your hardware token.
The Yubikey needs to have CCID mode enabled and a key generated.

* Generate a new x509 certificate
* Generate EFI public key variables updates and sign them
* Store public certificate in UEFI platform key (`PK`), key-exchange key (`KEK`) and database (`db`)
* Do not reboot yet! You have to sign the kernel first.

### Signed Linux setup
* Add UEFI boot menu item for safe boot kernel
* Sign the vmlinux, initrd and command line
* Reboot and see if it works...
* Worst case: go back into setup, disable SecureBoot
* Verify that lockdown is in place, IOMMU, etc

### TPM Configuration
The Trusted Platform Module serves two purposes in securing the process:
it helps validate that the firmware and boot configuration is unchanged,
and it streamlines the boot process by providing the key for encrypted disks.
On modern systems Boot Guard ensures that the initial boot block is
measured into the TPM, so a local attacker shouldn't be able to modify the SPI flash
contents to bypass the measurements, or to add their own keys to bypass
the signing.  (Subject to various CVE's and TOCTOUs, etc)

* Create a new disk encryption key with random data
* Add new key slot to disk with new key
* Choose PCRs, seal new key into the TPM
* Add initramfs building hooks
* Add /etc/crypttab entry for unlock script
* `update-initramfs -u`
* TODO: Package this into a `.deb` file

### System Integrity Protection mode
The "SIP" mode ensure that even an attacker with root priviledges
can't make persistent changes to the contents of the root filesystem.
The root of the dm-verity Merkle-tree is passed to the kernel as part of the
signed command line, ensuring that an attacker can't change anything
on the filesystem without access to the signing key.
Any modifications to the filesystem will be detected when the modified
blocks are read, allowing the system to enter recovery mode to protect
its data.

* For dm-verity and read-only root:
* Separate `/`, `/var` and `/home`
* (need to show how to do this post install for 20.04)
* Two copies of `/` for A-B switching and atomic updates

When changes to `/` need to be made, such as to install new packages
with `apt-get`, the root file system has to be remounted `rw`, the
updates applied, and then a new hash tree generated and signed.
Alternatively, two `/` filesystems can be on the disk. Updates are
applied to the unused one and signed, and then on the next boot
the correct root filesystem is selected.

## Updates
Nothing ever stays static, so it is important to consider the steps
for updating the system.  Frequently the root file system and kernel
will be updated together, so these steps can be batched.  Hopefully
TPM re-sealing doesn't have to happen as often, since it requires
access to the disk encryption recovery key.

### Root filesystem updates
* Remount `/` read-write
* Perform updates
* Remount `/` read-only
* Compute block hashes and root hash
* Optionally regenerate the initrd
* Add root hash to command line
* Sign kernel/initramfs/commandline
* These could be done offline and the block image pushed to the system for installation

## Kernel and initramfs update phase
* Re-generate `/boot/initrd` and `/boot/vmlinuz`
* Merge the kernel, initrd and command line into a single EFI executable
* Use the hardware token to sign that executable
* Copy the signed image to the EFI boot partition
* These could be done offline and the block image pushed to the system for installation

## UEFI firmware update
If there are any updates to the UEFI firmware, such as changing the
`Setup` variable, then the TPM sealed keys will no longer be accessible
and the recovery key will be necessary to re-seal the drive.  This
requires access to the recovery key since a new random key is generated
and needs to be stored into a keyslot on the drive.

The assumption is that there is no TPM2 resource manager running,
either at runtime or in the initrd, so it is possible for the tools
to directly talk to the TPM2.

-----

# RAW NOTES

-----
This guide was written using Ubuntu 20.04 and `tpm2-tools` 4.1.1.
Unfortunately there has been churn in the names of the tools and
the command line options, so it does not work on 18.04.
All of the commands are run as `root`.

The `cryptdisk-seal` program will securely generate a random key
for encrypting the disk and add it to the LUKS key slot 1; the
normal installer uses key slot 0 for the manually entered key,
which will be left as a recovery key in case there is a TPM failure.
In order to add the new key, you will have to enter the existing
recovery key (set during initial install).

The random key will also be sealed into the TPM as a persistent object
using the current value of the important PCRs.

In order for the `initrd` to be able to unseal and decrypt the key,
it is necessary to also install a "hook" into the initramfs generation
routine.

TODO: Extend a PCR so that the key can not be unsealed again after boot.

PCR 2 changes based on the boot variable selected -- can be used
to ensure that this is not a wrong boot.
PCR 4 and 10 change with the kernel/initrd image

`tpm2-initramfs-tool`? where did that come from? can totally replace
ugly hacks in the sealing/unsealing code



Other helpful links:
* https://robertou.com/tpm2-sealed-luks-encryption-keys.html which uses a less standard TPM toolkit
* https://threat.tevora.com/secure-boot-tpm-2/ which is out of date on the tpm2 command line options
* https://github.com/timchen119/tpm2-initramfs-tool which stores the pass phrase in the TPM, rather than a separate key
* https://www.crowdstrike.com/blog/enhancing-secure-boot-chain-on-fedora-29/


Meaning for UEFI is defined in
[Microsoft's "`OSPlatformValidation_UEFI`" registry key](https://getadmx.com/?Category=MDOP&Policy=Microsoft.Policies.BitLockerManagement::PlatformValidation_UEFI_Name). By default Bitlocker uses 0, 2, 4, 8, 9, 10, 11.

* PCR 0: Core System Firmware executable code
* PCR 1: Core System Firmware data
* PCR 2: ROM Code (was Extended or pluggable executable code?)
* PCR 3: Extended or pluggable firmware data
* PCR 4: MBR Code (was Boot Manager?)
* PCR 5: GPT / Partition Table
* PCR 6: Resume from S4 and S5 Power State Events
* PCR 7: Secure Boot State
* PCR 8: NTFS Boot Secure (was Initialized to 0 with no Extends (reserved for future use)?)
* PCR 9: NTFS Boot Block (was Initialized to 0 with no Extends (reserved for future use)?)
* PCR 10: NTFS Boot Manager (was Initialized to 0 with no Extends (reserved for future use)?)
* PCR 11: BitLocker Access Control
* PCR 12: Data events and highly volatile events
* PCR 13: Boot Module Details
* PCR 14: Boot Authorities
* PCR 15-23: Reserved for future use

Install the tools on the running system:
```
apt install \
	tpm2-tools \
	tpm2-abrmd \
	efitools \
	gnu-efi \
	opensc \
	yubico-piv-tool \
	libengine-pkcs11-openssl \
	build-essential \
	git \
	autotools \
	binutils-dev \
	libssl-dev \
	uuid-dev \
	help2man \
```



```
yubico-piv-tool -s 9c -a generate -o pubkey.pem # will take a while and overwrite any existing private keys
yubico-piv-tool -s 9c -a verify-pin -a selfsign-certificate -S '/OU=test/O=example.com/' -i pubkey.pem -o cert.pem
yubico-piv-tool -s 9c -a import-certificate -i cert.pem
openssl x509 -outform der -in cert.pem -out cert.crt
openssl x509 -in cert.pem -text -noout # display the contents of the PEM file
```

To retrieve the cert later:
```
yubico-piv-tool -s 9c -a read-certificate -o cert.pem
```

----

Ubuntu 20.04 installation:
* "Try it", then 
* "Advanced" - "LVM encrypt"
* Install as normal, then 
* Then reduce the root volume before rebooting and create some new entries for `/home` and `/var`:
```
sudo e2fsck -f /dev/vgubuntu/root
sudo resize2fs /dev/vgubuntu/root 32G
sudo lvreduce -L 32G /dev/vgubuntu/root
sudo lvcreate -L 80G -n home vgubuntu
sudo lvcreate -L 16G -n var vgubuntu
sudo mkfs.ext4 /dev/vgubuntu/home
sudo mkfs.ext4 /dev/vgubuntu/var
```

The `/etc/fstab` will need to be updated to include these two partitions
and to switch the `root` partition to `ro`.

Creating dm-verity hashes takes a while (smaller `/` file systems are faster):
```
sudo veritysetup format --debug /dev/vgubuntu/root /boot/root.hashes
```

Even a read-only mount will modify the filesystem, so this is problematic
for a dmverity installation. `mount -o noload` is supposed to fix it, but...

Notes on writing initramfs scripts: http://manpages.ubuntu.com/manpages/xenial/man8/initramfs-tools.8.html

* "Something else"
** sda1: EFI system partition
** sda2: /boot (ext4)
** sda3: encrypted partition (have to click back?)
** create partition table
** / -- 64 GB
** /var - 16 GB
** swap -- 16 GB
** /home -- the rest
* and this is broken in 20.04... trying via preseed

https://www.chucknemeth.com/linux/distribution/debian/debian-9-preseed-uefi-encrypted-lvm


efitools from source for `-e` engine support: https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/jejb/efitools.git

sbsign from source for yubikey support: https://github.com/osresearch/sbsigntools

yubikey setup for PK (and KEK, and DB)

reboot into uefi setup, configure bios for security:
* admin password
* thunderbolt, etc
* take ownership of TPM
* tamper detection
* secure boot - clear keys

reboot into linux

build linux kernel and initrd image
* tpm keys
* hook initramfs creation
* merge, sign and install into /boot
```
sudo efibootmgr  --create --disk /dev/sda --part 1 --label linux --loader '\EFI\linux\linux.efi'
```

build recovery USB
* sign kernel and initramfs

install secureboot keys
* sign pk update with key
```
cert-to-efi-sig-list -g `uuidgen` /boot/cert.pem cert.esl
sign-efi-sig-list -e pkcs11 -k 'pkcs11:' -c /boot/cert.pem PK cert.esl PK.auth
sign-efi-sig-list -e pkcs11 -k 'pkcs11:' -c /boot/cert.pem KEK cert.esl KEK.auth
sign-efi-sig-list -e pkcs11 -k 'pkcs11:' -c /boot/cert.pem db cert.esl db.auth
```
* install platform keys, kek and db, replacing the lenovo and microsoft ones (must be in this order; once PK is set the others will not be changed)
```
efi-updatevar -f db.auth  db
efi-updatevar -f KEK.auth  KEK
efi-updatevar -f PK.auth  PK
```

for signing the db entries, `sign-efi-sig-list` needs too many
key entries.  it can create detached blobs to be signed:

./bin/sign-efi-sig-list -o -t '2020-05-01' -c cert.pem db cert.esl db.raw

the correct 256 byte signature on this can be computed:

pkcs11-tool -s -p 123456 -m SHA256-RSA-PKCS < db.raw




* for corporate deployment: install signed setup variable?

----
reboot
* boot order
* test usb 

other things to do:
* read-only root
* dm-verity
* separate /home
* turn off automatic filesystem mounting

kernel and initrd update process:
* run update-initram-fs
* run merging tools
* run signing tool
* needs the security token

disk re-keying:
* necessary if firmware setup variables change
* should not be required for kernel updates


----

# Read only root file system
* overlay root: https://gist.github.com/mutability/6cc944bde1cf4f61908e316befd42bc4


